First ops hire blog post (#6669)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/first-ops-hire.mdx

---
date: 2023-09-07
title: Making your first startup ops hire – what founders should look for
rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
author:
  - charles-cook
featuredImage: ../images/blog/posthog-blog-image.png
featuredImageType: full
category: Startups
tags:
  - Guides
---

> I've previously written about [startup hiring strategy](/blog/early-stage-startup-hiring-strategy) more generally. This article covers a specific role – what to look out for when making your first ops hire into your startup, aka probably your first non-engineer. Usually this person is hire number 5-10, and they will take over stuff that one of the cofounders has been doing up to that point.

Reviewer: intro is boring!

Author: Yeah I was trying to build credibility/explain why you should listen to me. How about:

'Most founders I talk to approach their first ops hire in a totally sensible but wrong way. Their typical approach is to look at the long list of admin tasks they have accumulated, cry a bit, and then look for someone who has done those things before, plus a bit extra. However, the reality is that attributes >>> technical expertise when it comes to your first ops hire.'

Alternative approach - just delete this section and cut straight to 'Your first ops hire will have a disproportionate impact on your company culture.'

Ops is a 100% defensive position in the early stages. Many people think it is about building structures and systems for hyper scale, but the reality is that up to ~50 people you are just putting out fires and making sure no one gets arrested. This means an ops person is only fixing problems, often problems they should have anticipated.

Working on many small things means more opportunity to make mistakes, many of which affect people personally, e.g. payroll, benefits, expenses. Team members will then (understandably) get annoyed, and your ops hire has to be _totally unflappable_. On top of that, team members will ignore the ops person's emails/messages/policies and then get annoyed when something doesn't work.

In both situations, your ops person needs to deploy their sunniest demeanor and gratefully fix the problem. Not doing so is the equivalent of telling off your users for complaining about your product.

> **Antipattern**
> Someone who considers certain 'boring admin tasks' to be beneath them.

> **How to interview for this**
> - Tell me about a time that you were blamed for a mistake that you felt was someone else's fault? How did you respond to it?

> > - What is the biggest disappointment you have had in your career to date?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - What is the biggest disappointment you have had in your career to date?
> - What is the most ridiculously trivial thing you ever did to help your team out?
```

---
date: 2023-09-07
title: Making your first startup ops hire - what founders should look for
rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
author:
  - charles-cook
featuredImage: ../images/blog/posthog-blog-image.png
featuredImageType: full
category: Startups
tags:
  - Guides
---

> I've [previously written](https://posthog.com/blog/early-stage-startup-hiring-strategy) about startup hiring strategy more generally. This article covers a specific role - what to look out for when making your first ops hire into your startup, aka probably your first non-engineer. Usually this person is hire number 5-10, and they will take over stuff that one of the cofounders has been doing up to that point.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I've previously written about [startup hiring strategy](/blog/early-stage-startup-hiring-strategy) more generally. This article covers a specific role – what to look out for when making your first ops hire into your startup, aka probably your first non-engineer. Usually this person is hire number 5-10, and they will take over stuff that one of the cofounders has been doing up to that point.
```

> Your first ops person will have a disproportionate impact on your company culture, because they do work that affects everyone on the team personally, so it's worth getting this stuff right.
> 
> You want your first ops hire to be:
> - Extremely optimistic
> - Willing to eat a lot of shit
> - Utterly dependable

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It's an important hire because your first ops person will have a disproportionate impact on your company culture. They'll do work that affects everyone on the team personally, and hopefully ensure the founders can focus on [finding product-market fit](/blog/product-market-fit-game) and making the company a success. 

With that in mind, these are the three attributes your first ops hire needs...
```

> ### Attribute 1 - they are extremely optimistic

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Attribute 1: Extreme optimism
```

Anyone on the team at any level of seniority has to be able to ask your ops hire for help without worrying they're going to be annoyed. No request should feel too trivial. Additionally, most founders work directly with the first ops hire, so it has to be someone they _want_ to talk to multiple times a week, even if it's about boring ops stuff (that we ops people love).

Your ops hire has to believe that all problems are fixable. This still means taking problems seriously, but (and I know this sounds cheesy) you want your ops hire to relish the opportunity to put out fires and make the lives of the team better as a result.

> **Antipattern**
> Someone who sighs, rolls their eyes, or panics when hit with an annoying problem.
> 
> **How to interview for this**
> - Tell me about a time you got something done in a stressful situation when everyone else was panicking.
> - What is a process that you implemented which was important but boring for your team to follow? How did you get them to engage?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Antipattern**
> Someone who sighs, rolls their eyes, or panics when hit with an annoying problem.

> **How to interview for this**
> - Tell me about a time you got something done in a stressful situation when everyone else was panicking.
> - What is a process that you implemented which was important but boring for your team to follow? How did you get them to engage?
```

> ### Attribute 2 - they are willing to eat a lot of shit

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Attribute 2: Willingness to eat a lot of shit
```

> Ops is a 100% defensive position in the early stages. Many people think it is about building structures and systems for hyper scale, but the reality is that up to ~50 people you are just putting out fires and making sure no one gets arrested. This means an ops person is only fixing problems, and often they are ones that they should have anticipated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ops is a 100% defensive position in the early stages. Many people think it is about building structures and systems for hyper scale, but the reality is that up to ~50 people you are just putting out fires and making sure no one gets arrested. This means an ops person is only fixing problems, often problems they should have anticipated.
```

Working on many small things means more opportunity to make mistakes, many of which affect people personally, e.g. payroll, benefits, expenses. Team members will then (understandably) get annoyed, and your ops hire has to be _totally unflappable_. On top of that, team members will ignore the ops person's emails/messages/policies and then get annoyed when something doesn't work.

In both situations, your ops person needs to deploy their sunniest demeanor and gratefully fix the problem. Not doing so is the equivalent of telling off your users for complaining about your product.

> **Antipattern**
> Someone who considers certain 'boring admin tasks' to be beneath them.
> 
> **How to interview for this**
> - Tell me about a time that you were blamed for a mistake that you felt was someone else's fault? How did you respond to it?
> - What is the biggest disappointment you have had in your career to date?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Antipattern**
> Someone who considers certain 'boring admin tasks' to be beneath them.

> **How to interview for this**
> - Tell me about a time that you were blamed for a mistake that you felt was someone else's fault? How did you respond to it?
> - What is the biggest disappointment you have had in your career to date?
```

> ### Attribute 3 - they are utterly dependable

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Attribute 3: They're utterly dependable
```

> Your first ops hire is going to have top level admin access to _everything_ - banking, passwords, AWS etc. If they don't you're wasting your time - wait to hire someone you trust with this stuff.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Your first ops hire is going to have top-level admin access to _everything_ – banking, passwords, AWS etc. If they don't, you're wasting your time – wait to hire someone you trust with this stuff.
```

> In addition to trusting them with the information, you need to be able to trust that they will be there. While you shouldn't expect your ops hire to work all evenings and weekends, having a wonderful work-life balance doesn't quite apply when you're hiring a single point of failure for a bunch of your systems. It is reasonable to expect your first ops hire to occasionally jump online out of hours to give someone access to an account, answer an urgent legal question, or look into a suspicious bank transaction. And, per Attribute 1, they should make it easy for you to ask them. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition to trusting them with the information, you need to trust they'll be available. While you shouldn't expect your ops hire to work all evenings and weekends, having a wonderful work-life balance doesn't quite apply when you're hiring a single point of failure for a bunch of your systems. 

It is reasonable to expect your first ops hire to occasionally jump online out of hours to give someone access to an account, answer an urgent legal question, or look into a suspicious bank transaction. And, per Attribute 1, they should make it easy for you to ask them. 
```

Finally, your first ops hire needs to recuse themselves from general office gossip, irrespective of seniority. If they are doing payroll for example, you need to be 100% confident they're not sharing this stuff with the wider team.

> **Antipattern**
> Someone who is literally never available outside of the 9-5
> 
> **How to interview for this**
> - You'll generally pick up on this in the interview when you see how they talk about their previous places they've worked.
> - This is probably something you also need to validate through references (when available). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Antipattern**
> Someone who is literally never available outside of the 9-5
>
> **How to interview for this**
> - You'll generally pick up on this in the interview when you see how they talk about their previous places they've worked.
> - This is probably something you also need to validate through references (when available). 
```
